Add short doc on transactions (#14258)
PrefectHQ/prefect: docs/3.0rc/develop/transactions.mdx

---

> title: Transactions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Write transactions
```

description: Learn how transactional semantics help you minimize the cost of failure and add idempotency to your workflows.
---

Prefect supports _transactional semantics_ in your workflows that allow you to rollback on task failure
and configure groups of tasks that run as an atomic unit.

A _transaction_ in Prefect corresponds to a job that needs to be done. 
A transaction runs at most one time, and produces a result record upon completion at a unique address 
specified by a dynamically computed cache key. 
These records can be shared across tasks and flows based on their own key computation policies.

Under the hood, every Prefect task run is governed by a transaction.
In the default mode of task execution, all you need to understand about transactions are [the policies
determining the task's cache key computation](/3.0rc/develop/write-tasks#caching). 

<Tip> 

> **Transactions and States**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Transactions and states**
```

Transactions and states are similar but different in important ways. 
Transactions determine whether a task should or should not execute, whereas states enable visibility into
code execution status.
</Tip>

### Write your first transaction

Tasks can be grouped into a common transaction using the `transaction` context manager:

```python
import os

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

from prefect import task, flow
from prefect.transactions import transaction

@task
def write_file(contents: str):
    "Writes to a file."
    with open("side-effect.txt", "w") as f:
        f.write(contents)

@write_file.on_rollback
def del_file(transaction):
    "Deletes file."
    os.unlink("side-effect.txt")

@task
def quality_test():
    "Checks contents of file."
    with open("side-effect.txt", "r") as f:
        data = f.readlines()

    if len(data) < 2:
        raise ValueError("Not enough data!")

@flow
def pipeline(contents: str):
    with transaction():
        write_file(contents)
        quality_test()
```

> If you run this flow `pipeline(contents="hello world!")` it will clearly fail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you run this flow `pipeline(contents="hello world!")` it will fail.
```

> What's most relevant is that after the flow has exited, there is no `"side-effect.txt"` file in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Importantly, after the flow has exited, there is no `"side-effect.txt"` file in
```

your working directory.
This is because the `write_file` task's `on_rollback` hook was executed due to the transaction failing.

<Tip>
**`on_rollback` hooks are different than `on_failure` hooks**

Notice that the `on_rollback` hook is executed when the `quality_test` task fails, not the `write_file`

> task that it is associated with (which succeeded)!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
task that it is associated with it, which succeeded.
```

> This is because rollbacks occur whenever the transaction a task is participating in fails, which can include

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is because rollbacks occur whenever the transaction a task is participating in fails, even if that
```

> failures outside the task's local scope.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
failure is outside the task's local scope.
```

> This is precisely what makes transactions an interesting pattern for managing pipeline failure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This behavior makes transactions a valuable pattern for managing pipeline failure.
```

</Tip>

> ### The Lifecyle of a Transaction

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Transaction lifecycle
```

Every transaction goes through at most four lifecycle stages:

> - **BEGIN**: in this phase, the transaction's key is computed and looked up; if a record already exists at 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **BEGIN**: in this phase, the transaction's key is computed and looked up. If a record already exists at 
```

the key location the transaction considers itself committed.
- **STAGE**: in this phase, the transaction stages a piece of data to be committed to its result location.
Whether this data is committed or rolled back depends on the commit mode of the transaction.

>     - **ROLLBACK**: if the transaction encounters _any_ error **after** staging, it rolls itself back and does

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **ROLLBACK**: if the transaction encounters _any_ error **after** staging, it rolls itself back and does
```

>     not proceed to commit anything.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
not proceed to commit anything.
```

> - **COMMIT**: in this final phase, the transaction writes its record to its configured location; at this point

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **COMMIT**: in this final phase, the transaction writes its record to its configured location. At this point
```

the transaction is considered complete.

It is important to note that rollbacks only occur _after_ the transaction has been staged.
Revisiting our example from above, there are actually _three_ transactions at play:
- the larger transaction that begins when `with transaction()` is executed; this transaction remains active
throughout the duration of the subtransactions within it.

> - the transaction associated with the `write_file` task; upon completion of the `write_file` task, this 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the transaction associated with the `write_file` task. Upon completion of the `write_file` task, this 
```

transaction is now **STAGED**.

> - the transaction associated with the `quality_test` task; this transaction fails before it can be staged,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the transaction associated with the `quality_test` task. This transaction fails before it can be staged,
```

causing a rollback in its parent transaction which then rolls back any staged subtransactions. In particular,
the staged `write_file`'s transaction is rolled back.

<Tip>

> **Task's also have `on_commit` lifecycle hooks**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Tasks also have `on_commit` lifecycle hooks**
```

> In addition to the `on_rollback` hook, task's can also register `on_commit` hooks that execute whenever

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the `on_rollback` hook, a task can also register `on_commit` hooks that execute whenever
```
